To: J3                                                     J3/##-###
From: Tom Clune & subgroup generics
Subject: Thoughts on additional generics features
Date: 2022-Aug-16


1. Introduction
---------------

This paper provides a rough summary additional generics capabilities
that the generics subgroup hopes to introduce in F202y in roughly the
order of decreasing priority (within each section).  Completing syntax
and edits for the currently approved set of generics features remains
the top priority, of course.

Section 2 concerns features that support rank-agnostic algorithms,
while section 3 concerns features that support algorithms on
containers.  We will follow-up with use-case papers as we digest these
further.

2. Further rank-agnostic features
---------------------------------

2.1 Enable additional usage of assumed rank arguments

  As noted at the July meeting, many existing template use cases could
  be considerably simplified if more operations were allowed for
  assumed rank arguments.

2.2 Deferred rank entities

  As the name suggests, a deferred rank entity has a rank that is
  unknown at compile time.  These are a bit like assumed rank
  arguments, except that there is no "ultimate" actual argument with
  known rank.

  A simple motivating use case here is making a rank-agnostic
  implementation for a swap template, assuming that certain operations
  on assumed rank arguments also become permitted.  (In this case, we
  need whole array intrinsic assignment.)

2.3 Rank agnostic nested loops

  The motivating use case here is to enable the ability to write a
  template for outer product for two arrays of rank N and rank M. This
  generally involves an M + N nested loop.  Existing Fortran elemental
  capabilities are sufficient to encapsulate M (or N) of these
  loops, but not all.

2.4 Mathematics of Arrays

  We intend to form a working group to look at "A Mathematics of
  Arrays" (Lenore Mullin PhD 1988.)  This paper introduces a series of
  operators that treat arrays in a rank-agnostic manner.  Fortran
  already has some of these capabilities, and the new "@" notation is
  a fundamental operator in the paper from which the others are
  defined.

  We expect that once we fully understand the paper (it uses very
  dense unconventional notation), we will propose a small set of
  additional intrinsic procedures/operators that "complete" Fortran's
  support for arrays in this context.

3. Further support for containers
---------------------------------

3.1 Provide looping mechanism for containers

   The goal here is to provide succinct syntax that is simple and safe
   and executes the body of the loop on each element in the container.

   Possible approaches to this were discussed at the July meeting and
   we think something reasonably elegant is possible.

3.2 Provide analog of ELEMENTAL

   A common operation with containers is to apply some function to
   each of the elements in a container.  Arrays are one type of
   container, and Fortran provides ELEMENTAL which avoids the need
   for managing explicit loops in user code.

   If successful with the looping mechanism above, it should be quite
   straightforward to generalize ELEMENTAL to the case of containers.

===END===
      
