To: J3                                                     J3/21-144
From: T. Clune and generics subgroup
Subject: Generics Use Cases
Date: 2021-June-07

References: N2147, 18-110r1


1. Introduction
===============

In WG5/N2147, "Fortran 202X Feature Survey Results -- Final", by Steve
Lionel, the proposed F202X feature that had the most interest and the
most comments was "Generic Programming or Templates". This feature had
a score of 6.21, compared to the next highest score of 5.04 for
"Automatic Allocation on READ into ALLOCATABLE character or array". It
also had almost four pages of comments, while no other feature had as
much as a full page of comments. In spite of the obvious demand for
this feature, its complexity made it inappropriate to include in
Fortran 202X. Instead it was planned that preliminary work on this
feature would be fitted into the schedule of work on Fortran 202X in
the hope that this would allow the completion of the work during the
development of Fortran 202Y.

Any syntax suggestions in this paper are notional, and only for
illustrative purposes.

This paper uses the term 'template' to refer to a generic entity that
can be 'instantiated' into concrete implementations using sets of
input 'template parameters'. While there are other possible approaches
to generic programming, (e.g., intelligent macros), the guidance from
J3 in the formation of the generics subgroup was to pursue something
that is at least roughly along the lines of the template approach in
other languages.  We also note that previous work on Parameterized
Modules easily fits within the intentionally vague definition of
templates in this context.

NOTE 1: This paper is intended to be a living document.  As we develop
the F202Y generics features, these use cases will be used for
traceability in the subsequent requirements paper.  If additional use
cases are encountered, or existing ones require modifications, new
versions of this use case paper will be submitted for vote.  And if
any previously approved use cases are subsequently shown to be
unworkable or too difficult, the paper will be modified to reflect
this.  Straw votes will be captured and preserved in subsequent
revisions to indicate the degree of support for specific elements.

Ideally this paper will be stable once the corresponding requirements
document is written and accepted.


2. Use Cases
============

The use cases in this paper are broken into broad categories.  Partly
this decomposition is to facilitate a gradual increase of complexity,
but in some cases these are also expected to drive different sets of
requirements.  Use cases that have redundant requirements are
generally suppressed in this paper, with the exception being when an
otherwise redundant use case might resonate with segments of the user
community or the committee.


The identified categories of use cases are:

    * Geniric Algorithms (2.1)
    * Generic Containers (2.2)
    * Usability, verification, and composition (2.3)


2.1 [ALG] Generic algorithms
----------------------------

2.1.1 Simple use case - SWAP

Perhaps the most common use case of all is the desire to provide a
generic template for swapping the values of two entities.  The
nontrivial aspect of this operation is the need to declare an
auxiliary variable to hold one of the values during processing.

The Fortran generics facility should provide the means to declare a
SWAP template that is applicable for any type that supports copy
assignment.

Notionally, the instantiation of the template for a type T should be
equivalent to:

   SUBROUTINE SWAP(a, b)
      TYPE(T), INTENT(INOUT) :: a
      TYPE(T), INTENT(INOUT) :: b

      TYPE(T) :: tmp

      tmp = a ! note the use of copy assignment operator '='
      a = b
      b = tmp

   END SUBROUTINE SWAP

A few variations of SWAP functionality are worth considering. These
are primarily intended as proxies for analogous issues that naturally
arise in a wide set of use cases that attempt to be as general as
possible.  In particular these variants emphasize the important
wrinkle that Fortran "type" does not include kind, rank, and other
attributes.

Variant 1: Arbitrary rank

The SWAP instantiation above is designed to work with scalars, but the
underlying algorithm is equally applicable to arrays of arbitrary (but
consistent) shape.  Rank agnostic features planned for F202X are of
significant value in this context, but still require a lengthy SELECT
RANK construct.  It is desirable to provide simple means that enable
developers to declare templates that are rank agnostic.  E.g., one
approach could be to allow integer template parameters that allow the
rank to be specified explicitly and then more easily combined with
already-planned rank-agnostic features.


Variant 2: Parameterized types

The instantiation above works for types that lack is intended to work
with types , but the underlying algorithm is equally applicable to
parameterized types provide that the actual type parameters of both
dummy arguments agree.  It is desirable to provide developers with a
simple means to declare templates that work with arbitrary
parameterized types subject to appropriate requirements.


Variant 3: Optional attributes

With minor modification the swap algorithm also works with pointers
and allocatables.  (3A) For pointers, the instantiation would declare
the dummy arguments and local variable with the POINTER attribute and
use pointer assignment. (3B) For allocatables, the instantiation would
declare the dummy arguments and local variable with the ALLOCATABLE
attribute and use MOVE_ALLOC.  In the case of arrays, the ALLOCATABLE
variant could relax the requirement that the shapes of the dummy
arguments be the same.  Likewise for the case of deferred length-type
parameters, the requirement that deferred length type parameters be
the same for both dummy arguments could be relaxed.

It is desirable to provide developers with simple means to minimize
duplication of logic across such variants.  At the very least this
implies the need for some mechanism to disambiguate ambiguous cases.


Straw votes:

Note that all straw votes in this paper are worded such that "YES" is
the answer that reflects the consensus of generics subgroup.

ALG-1: Should the generics facility enable developers to define a
       scalar SWAP template that will apply to any type that supports
       copy assigment?  (YES, NO, UNDECIDED, ABSTAIN)

ALG-2: Should the generics facility enable developers to easily define
       a SWAP template that will work with arbitrary ranks?  (YES, NO,
       UNDECIDED, ABSTAIN)

ALG-3: Should the generics facility enable developers to write a
       single SWAP template that can work with arbitrary parameterized
       types?  (YES, NO, UNDECIDED, ABSTAIN)

ALG-4: Should the generics facility enable developers to write a
       single SWAP template that can work with optional attributes?
       (YES, NO, UNDECIDED, ABSTAIN)


2.1.2 Generic analogs of instrinsic-like procedures
---------------------------------------------------

A common category of use cases for generics is the desire to apply the
algorithms used in Fortran intrinsic procedures to user-defined types.
Indeed some intrinsic procedures are defined to work on any user type:
PACK, RESHAPE, SHAPE, SPREAD, etc..  But others such as FINDLOC,
MINLOC, MAXLOC, MINVAL, MAXVAL, etc. are restricted to instrinsic
types.  The primary reason for such restrictions is that, unlike the
first set of named intrinsics, these require certain operations to be
supported that are not necessarily satisfied by arbitrary user-defined
types.

Consider the prototypical example of FINDLOC.  The underlying
algorithm requires comparing individual elements of the array with a
specified value.  This works for intrinsics because they all support
the '==' operator.  A generic template for a generalized FINDLOC would
work for any user-defined type T that likewise defined a '==' operator
that returns a logical when passed two arguments of type T.

We note here that one approach to satisfying this use case might be to
simply relax the requirements on some intrinsics.  While this might
itself be desirable, our intent here is to introduce appropriately
powerful capabilites to allow Fortran developers to define new
templates with comparable functionality.  Intrinsic procedures
themselvs are merely the tip of the proverbial iceberg of relevant use
cases, but serve as examples that are readily familiar to all.


Straw vote:

ALG-5: Should the generics facility enable developers to define
       templates that extend Fortran intrinsics (FINDLOC, MINLOC, etc)
       to work with user defined types which support any operations
       required for a given algorithm? (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)


2.1.3 Sorting and Searching
---------------------------

Sorting

While the need to sort a list of items is somewhat rarer in typical
Fortran applications than in wider software communities, it
nonetheless arises often enough to be a problem. It is typically
applied to a rank one array, but sorting algoritms can usually be
generalized to other categorise of containers with appropriate
iterators, e.g. Lists and Vectors. A given sorting algorithm can
generally be applied to any type that provides a comparison (< or >)
operation, or equivalent binary logical predicate. With current
Fortran capabilities, the algorithm must be re-implemented for each
type.  We note however, that some simplification possible through the
use of include files and newly the newly introduced TYPEOF.

A generic sorting procedure has the following requirements:

* the ability to have a general type as a generic parameter either as
  an explicit parameter or as implicit in the iterators;

* the ability to associate an assignment operation with a type
  parameter, either implicitly as a property of all types, or as a
  property of the type definition, or as an explicit parameter to the
  generic with a defined interface;

* the ability to associate a comparison operation with a generic type
  parameter, either implicitly as a property of the type definition,
  or as an explicit parameter to the generic with a defined interface;

* and the ability to take one or more iterators as instantiation
  parameters.

It is often necessary to sort the same data according to different
comparison criteria.  It is therefore desirable that the Fortran
generics facility provide means to specify the comparison operation as
a separate template parameter.  This functionality is less crucial
here than it is for the containers use case above, as in many cases
the comparison operator could be passed as a dummy argument to the
sorting procedure itself rather than as a template parameter.


Searching

Searching is the complement of sorting. One typically sorts an array
so that it can be searched for specific elements. A binary search
algorithm allows the searching of a sorted array with O(ln(n))
cost. For the search to be efficient, it must use the same comparison
operation used in the sorting. With current Fortran capabilities, the
algorithm must be re-implemented for each type - with some possible
simplification through the use of include files. The requirements for
the generic search are essentially the same as for the corresponding
sort algorithm.

Merging

It is sometimes useful to merge two sorted collections into one sorted
collection. The MERGE procedure must take two collections sorted using
the same comparison operation, iterate through both of them in the
same direction comparing current elements using the same comparison,
and enter them into a third collection according to the results of the
comparison.

A generic MERGE procedure has the following requirements:

* the ability to have a general type as a generic parameter either as
  an explicit parameter or as implicit in the iterators;

* the ability to associate an assignment operation with a type
  parameter, either implicitly as a property of all types, or as a
  property of the type definition, or as an explicit parameter to the
  generic with a defined interface;

* the ability to associate a comparison operation with a generic type
  parameter, either implicitly as a property of the type definition,
  or as an explicit parameter to the generic with a defined interface;

* and the ability to take two iterators as instantiation parameters.

Straw votes:

ALG-6: Should Fortran generics facilities enable developers to
       implement a sorting template that works with any type
       satisfying the criteria listed above?
       (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

ALG-7: Should Fortran generics facilities enable developers to
       implement a searching template that works with any type
       satisfying the criteria listed above?
       (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

ALG-8: Should Fortran generics facilities enable developers to
       implement a merge template that works with any type satisfying
       the criteria listed above?  (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)




2.1.4 Complex numerical algorithms
----------------------------------

Many complex numerical algorithms are written for specific intrinsic
types and kinds, but are actually applicable to a broader set of
types.  The applicability of such algoritms is often narrower than the
that of containers and intrinsic-like procedures, but templates could
still provide powerful, efficient tools within those more specialized
domains.  

Example: Block matrix algebra

Mathematical descriptions of algorithms are often expressed in terms
of block matrices (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_matrix).  While
such algorithms can always be "flattened" into algorithms working on
simple matrices, this conversion is tedious and error prone and
generally makes implementations difficult to follow.  Some developers
may find it useful to implement a template that performs matrix
operations on block matrices where types of the blocks are specified
as types that support certain numerical operations.  Note that each
block might itself be a block matrix.

As a concrete example, consider simple matrix-matrix multiplication on 

                C = A x B

Here A, B, and C are m by n, n by p, and m by p arrays of default
reals.  The (unoptimized) multiplication algorithm can be written as

    INTEGER :: i, j, k
    INTEGER :: m, n, p
    REAL :: A(m,n)
    REAL :: B(n,p)
    REAL :: C(m,p)

    DO i = 1, m
       DO j = 1, p
          C(i,j) = 0
          DO k = 1, n
             C(i,j) = C(i,j) + A(i,k)*B(k,j)
	  END DO
       END DO
    END DO


This algorithm can be generalized to types TA, TB, TC that satisfy
certain properties:

SUBROUTINE GENERIC_MATMUL(A,B,C)
    INTEGER :: i, j, k
    INTEGER :: m, n, p
    TYPE(TA), INTENT(IN) :: A(m,n)
    TYPE(TB), INTENT(IN) :: B(n,p)
    TYPE(TC), INTENT(IN) :: C(m,p)
    

    DO i = 1, m
       DO j = 1, p
          C = C%zero()
          DO k = 1, n
             C(i,j) = C(i,j) + A(i,k)*B(k,j))
	  END DO
       END DO
    END DO

END SUBROTINE GENERIC_MATMUL

The required properties on types TA, TB, and TC are:

    * Type TC must support an operation that returns a generalized "0"

    * Type TA must support (matrix) multiplication by type TB
      returning an intermediate type V

    * Type TC must support addition by type V returning intermediate
      type U

    * Type TC must support assignment to an intermediate type U

Note 1: These intermediate types may be the same as any of TA, TB, and
TC, but the algorithm here is intended to maximize generality.

Note 2: The "scalar" multiplication of types TB and TB in the nested
loop might itself be defined by using the same template, but the
template itself is not recursive.

Note 3: For performance purposes, it is important that the generic
facilities have some mechanism that allows the developer to default
over to optimized libraries (e.g., LAPACK) for types that correspond
to single and double precision reals and complex


Straw votes:

ALG-9: Should the Fortran generics facility provide sufficient
       generality to define numerical algorithms such as the
       generalized linear algebra described above?
       (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)


ALG-10: Should the Fortran generics facility provide the means to
        specialize templates for particular types?  E.g., to default
        to use of optimized libraries for instrinsic reals?
        (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)


2.2 [CONTAINERS] Generic Containers
-----------------------------------

As scientific models become more complex, an increasing fraction of
the lines of code are infrastructure as-opposed to direct numerical
calculation. Examples of such infrastructure include software layers
that couple independently developed subsystems, frameworks for
managing distributed parallelism, advanced I/O (e.g.,
checkpoint/restart via NetCDF), etc. Generally these infrastructure
layers evolve as an attempt to avoid code duplication as multiple
parts of the system require similar functionality.

Software "containers" are abstractions that enable aggregating groups
of related entities for convenient and efficient access of hte
contained items.  Many distinct varieties of software containers have
been developed and used.  By providing canonical and reliable means to
perform common operations, containers can greatly simplify
implementation of higher level algorithms.  design and implementation
of complex algorithms.

A closely related construct is that of a container 'iterator', which
provides a high-level mechanism to traverse all items within a given
container.  Such functionality becomes exceptionally important for
cantainers which use non-trivial internal storage such as binary trees.

Fortran arrays are one specific, and extremeley important variety of
software container.  Array containers are designed to optimize random
access to a _fixed_ collection of elements, and generally require all
contained elements to be of the same dynamic type. Fortran provides
excellent mechanisms for declaring and constructing arrays of any type
(intrinsic and user-defined) as well as for accessing, storing, and
modifying array members (elements) with succinct, tailored syntax:
tuples of indices within parens:

   a(i,j) = x
   x = a(i,j)
   a(i,j) = a(i,j)**2

But arrays are merely one common variety of container, albeit
exceptionally important for matrices and data represented on logically
rectangular domains.  Other commonly used container categories include
List, Vector, Associative Array (aka Map or Dictionary), Set, Stack,
Queue, etc.  Unlike Array containers, these others ar generally more
dynamic - growing in size as necessary when new elements are added to the
container. Here we briefly describe some of the most common varieties
of containers.

We also note that one approach to supporting the use cases in this
section would be to more directly add specific container varieties as
1st order features of Fortran.  However, the wide range of container
varieties compounded with the even wider range of potential internal
representations and algorithms suggests instead that language should
instead provide developers the means to define high-quality container
implementations.  (We envision that an effort analogous to container
templates in STL would readily emerge in the Fortran developer
community.)


2.2.1 Vector containers

In many ways, Vector containers are quite similar to one-dimensional
arrays.  Both provide for efficient random access of contained
elements via a contiguous block of memory, but Vector containers also
provide methods to insert and delete items at the 'back' of the
container.  If the reserved block of memory is insufficient for a
given insertion, a new larger block is automatically allocated and
existing data is transferred to the new storage.  (Block size is
typically doubled in such cases leading to O(n) asymptotic complexity
for inserting n items.)  Removal of items at other locations is
supported, but the operation is inefficient.

The need for vectors is often encountered when the number of items
that match some criterion is not known in advance.  Lacking such
functionality, Fortran codes often implement these scenarios with 2
sweeps with nearly identical logic.  The first sweeep merely counts
the number of matches and then allocates an array.  The second sweep
then populates the array.  Use of containers makes such algorithms
much simpler to understand in many respects.

* As with arrays, vectors require no operations on the contained type
  except assignment.


2.2.2 Set containers

Set containers are intended to store a sorted set of _unique_ objects
and provides logarithmic complexity for searching, removal and
insertion.

* Set containers do not support random access, and therefore
  require some form of iterator for traversing contained items.

* Set containers require that supported types provide an ordering
  operation.


2.2.3 Associative array (aka Map or Dictionary)

Map containers store elements that are formed by a combination of
unique keys and values, and thus generally involve 2 distinct
types.  To some degree, these containers can be regarded as a
generalization of Arrays where the index can be something other than
an integer, with strings being a common choice for keys.  Items stored
as a value in a map can be referenced via the key.  E.g.,

    temperature = state('temperature') ! "state" maps strings to reals
    ages('Bob') = 19                   ! "ages" maps strings to integers


Maps are particularly relevant for coupling complex physical models.
The use of standardized names for physical quantities allows for
unambigous exchange of data between subsystems.  This is generally
safer and more legible than using 'magic' indices or functions that
look up indices. (The latter can be thought of as a crude
implementation of a map.)


* Map containers require no operation on the value type except
  assignment.

* Some Map containers require that the key type provides an ordering
  operation, while others require that there is a hash function.


2.2.4 Miscellaneous containers

The specific containers mentioned above are among the most common, but
it is worth mentioning some other somewhat common varieties:

* Bitset
* List (singly linked, doubly linked)


2.2.5 Iterators

Iterators provide a simple/consistent mechanism to efficiently loop
through all of the elements in a container, or in some cases subsets
of a container. For containers such as Vector and Array, these are
relatively simple, but for containers such as Set and Map that are
implemented with binary trees or hash buckets, the iterator
abstraction is of exceptional value to the user of the
container. Iterators simultaneously hide complexity and encourage safe
coding styles. In pseudo-code iterator usage is typically something
like:

   < declare container > C
   < declare container iterator > I
   < declare element > e

   I = begin(C)
   loop while I is not end(C)
      e = get(I)
      < do something with e >
     next(I)
   end loop

It is desirable that the generics facility provides features which
will allow container implementations to provide companion iterator
implementations that provide clear and simple interfaces for container
users.


2.2.6 Accessors

One important obstacle to implementing convenient containers with
existing Fortran syntax, is the inability to overload suitabe syntax
for accessing individual container elements.  This is in stark
contrast with Fortran arrays which provide exceptionally elegant
accessors (index list enclosed in parens) to access array elements, and can
even be used on the left hand side of an assigment:

   x = a(i,j,k) + a(i+1,j,k)
   b(i,j,k) = y

Ideally, Fortran should provide some means to enable analogous
functionality for those containers that are indexable (e.g., Vector
and Map).



Variants:

Some of the concerns mentioned in the discussion of SWAP in an earlier
section, are of significant importance for creating containers that
can be used in common contexts.

Variant 1: Containing types with type parameters

Ideally, a well-written Vector container template should be able to
work with almost any type, as the algorithms involved make almost no
assumptions about the types involved.  However, kind and length type
parameters introduce difficulties in how structure components, local
variables, dummy variables, and function return values are declared in
a generic context.  The concern here is much greater than in the case
of SWAP owing to the much larger cost of developing variant container
templates to support such cases.

This problem is particularly evident when one considers
deferred-length strings - a common type for which support is desired.
Consider the following declarations for an intent in dummy argument,
a structure and a function return value for a simple type T:

    TYPE(T), INTENT(in) :: arg  ! dummy

    TYPE :: CONTAINER
       TYPE(T), ALLOCATABLE :: elements(:) ! component
    END TYPE CONTAINER

    TYPE(T), POINTER :: value ! function return

The analogous declarations in the case of a deferred length string
dummy argument (due to the length parameter) would be:

    TYPE(T(LEN=*)), INTENT(in) :: arg

    TYPE :: WRAPPER
       TYPE(T), ALLOCATABLE :: string(:)
    END TYPE WRAPPER
    TYPE :: CONTAINER
       TYPE(WRAPPER), ALLOCATABLE :: elements(:) ! component
    END TYPE CONTAINER

    TYPE(T(len=:)), POINTER :: value ! function return

Without strong support from the language, users of containers are
likely to be forced to create wrapper types which will significantly
impair the usability of containers.  Each container interaction would
involve at least one additional step to wrap or unwrap the desired
object.


Variant 2: Arbitrary rank contained objects

The concerns here are similar to those of SWAP.  In the case of
containers, such use cases are probably somewhat less common than the
type parameters, but by no means rare.

Variant 3: Type attributes

A very common use case for containers is to store pointers rather than
actual objects.  As above, a potential solution is to use wrapper
types, but that would significantly impede the usability of the
container.

Variant 4:  Alternative comparison operation

Containers such as Set and Map that use comparison operations to order
the contained objects are often used with the same type but different
comparison criteria.  A common use case of this is for a dictionary
whose keys are strings to treat those keys as case-insensitive.



Straw votes:

CONTAINERS-1: Should Fortran's generics facilities support the ability
              to develop templates for generic containers of arbitrary
	      type T? (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

CONTAINERS-2: Should Fortran's generics facilities enable developers to
              create convenient iterators?  (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)
	      
CONTAINERS-3: Should Fortran's generics facilities allow developers to
              define easy-to-use accessors both for obtaining objects
              and for assiging values to objects?
              (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

CONTAINERS-4: Should Fortran's generics facilities provide
              functionality that would allow a well-written container
              to work easily with types that have kind and/or length
              type parameters?  (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

CONTAINERS-5: Should Fortran's generics facilities provide
              functionality that allows a well-written container to
              handle pointers? (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

CONTAINERS-6: Should Fortran's generics facilities enable users of
              relevant containers to indepndently specify a comparison
              operation at instantiation?  (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)



2.3 [CONCEPTS] Usability, verification, and composition
-------------------------------------------------------

The use cases discussed in this section are of a rather different
character than those above.

Consider the following scenario: A complicated template procedure is
developed that involves numerous nontrivial operators and/or procedure
calls among the dummy arguments.  Intantiations of such a template
will generally be invalid except when the types passed in the template
instantiation parameters support these required operations.  A
concrete example can be found in the block matrix multiplication use
case described in the previous section.


2.3.1 Usability

Developers of such a template desire to have a clear, concise, and
canonical way to articulate requirements on the template type
parameters.  Likewise users of such templates would prefer to
determine in advance whether their own types will satisify the
requirements of a template.  Lacking such a mechanism, users must
resort to trial-and-error.  Further, if their types do not quite work,
they are at the mercy of the quality of compiler error messages to
infer whether any deficiencies in their types might be remedied.

2.3.2 Verification

Developers of complex templates may not only desire to communicate
their template requirements to potential users, but also verify that
instantiations will produce correct code for all types that meet the
requirements.  Here we envision the case that a developer might miss
documenting some necessary operation in the middle of complex code.
The developer tests the template with types that just happen to
support that undocumented operation, but some end user is not so
fortunate.

At the same time, while it is recognized that there is value to having
enforcement of verification, these protections might be inconvenient during
prototyping and/or introduction of additional scaffolding code.

2.3.3 Composition

Consider a template that in turn uses one or more nontrivial templates
internally.  The requirements on such a template are a superset of the
requirements for the internally used templates.  To avoid tedious
duplication, and the associated risks for long term maintenance, it
should be possible to encapsulate template requirements as named
entities that can be exported and reused.  (Bordering on a requirement
here, but trying to express as a use case.)



Straw votes:

CONCEPTS-1: Should template developers be able to clearly and
            concisely communicate the implied requirements on the
            types used in the template?  (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

CONCEPTS-2: Should template developers be able to verify that their
            templates do not use any unspecified implied
            requirements on the types used in the templates?
            (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)

CONCEPTS-3: Should it be possible to encapsulate template requirements
            for reuse in multiple contexts? (YES,NO,UNDECIDED,ABSTAIN)


